---
date: 2022-01-22T01:53
tags: [anime]
---

# In Defense of Darling in the Franxx

I finished Darling in the Franxx last weekend and because of work and life haven’t had a chance to write bout it. I took today off from work, and finally got to spend some time collecting my thoughts and doing some research and so without further ado here is my short form hot take. 

Ditf imo is an above average anime, and for me and my biases it even slides into the good category and I did enjoy watching it and would def watch it again. Its not great by any means and has more than a few missteps but I think this was a case of expectations from weekly watchers not meshing with the final third, combined with the internet hate machine forming a negative feedback loop which has memed Ditf into people unironically actually believing it is terrible. The rest of the writeup will be spoilered and includes spoilers for TTGL and Diebuster. I’ll try to structure it in roughly three parts, production history, common complaints & my complaints, and the things I enjoyed. Its long as shit so dunno if I expect anyone to actually read it but I enjoyed writing it lol.

## Production

I tried to find as many first hand sources as I could for the production history, and what I found was that the production history for this show has been misrepresented a shit ton online. For a refresher of anime production terms, please see: [[anime_production]]

With that out of the way what I find most important for the criticism of the show is the writing and so here are the writing credit breakdowns. Sourced from [ANN page](https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/encyclopedia/anime.php?id=19850)

**Director**: Atushi Nishigori

**Series Composition**: Atushi Nishigori, Naotaka Hayashi

**Screenplay**:\
**Atsushi Nishigori** - 1, 24\
**Rino Yamazaki** - 7, 9, 16\
**Hiroshi Seko** - 11, 14, 15, 22\
**Mashiko Otsuka** - 3, 10, 19\
**Naotaka Hayashi** - 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 12, 13, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23, 24

Now I did not go out of my way to see what studio these fellows were from during the time of airing but suffice to say any calls of trigger leaving the show after ep 16 and the story taking a nose dive after are incorrect. The writing from ep 1-16 were already a mixed bag of people, and everyone was writing based off of what Nishigori and Hayashi wanted to begin with. 

Additionally, with a little bit more heresy, the wiki for the episode lists gives a high level overview of which studio produced which episode. Production in this case meaning taking the screenplay and making the episode from it (storyboard -> animation). Not a lot of wiggle room when it comes to writing that any individual studio could impose once they were assigned an ep. While there is a lot of switching of studios between episodes I also read, tho not conclusively, that both studios also lent animators throughout the whole process so no episode production was ever one studio or the other. 

[Studio Trigger Panel at Anime NYC](https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/feature/2018-11-26/studio-trigger-panel-at-anime-nyc/.139981)\
The above article does seem to track with this. “He continued to emphasize that Trigger was only part of the beginning planning, behind the core designs and the earlier half of the show with A-1 Pictures taking the larger heft of the responsibility. Wakabayashi added they received comments that the story was very ‘Trigger-like,’ but said it was primarily from the director Atsushi Nishigori. ‘Everyone says it was Trigger's fault that it ended up in space, but that's not true!’”
While I have no doubt some creatives at Trigger helped the original Series composition, that and the writing seems mostly Nishigori and Hayashis doing. 

Finally I read, tho I can’t find the article no more, that while there was communication issues between how the two studios produced anime (again meaning being given a screenplay, storyboarding it and animating it) it was mostly a work side thing and did not impact the story writing.

## Complaints

With production history out of the way we can tackle the fun stuff, the complaints. While there are obv some differences in opinion here, I tried to read through a bunch old comments on the episodes, watched a couple videos and I feel I have a decent grasp of the common complaints. At a high level, the switched pacing starting around ep 19, the mass amount of exposition and story reveals also around ep 19, one note characters in the third act, characterization switches in the third act, and the ending itself not aligning with what the public at the time wanted from Hiro and Zero Two.

I don’t think Ditf is very original as a whole, despite being an anime original. It brazenly draws from many anime, most notably for me Diebuster, TTGL, and Eva while doing very little unique itself. Using robots to explore sexuality and relationships with partners is not unique either, to my understanding Eureka 7 does this as well (haven’t seen it). Relationship, platonic or romantic, drama between pilots is not uncommon in the above shows. The framing of it may be slightly different in Ditf, i.e. it is written and storyboarded for the first 2/3s to be very romantically focused, but overall I thought while neat it was not groundbreaking. I think the disconnect for a lot of viewers was that they expected the writing and subsequently the direction and pacing to follow suit throughout the whole anime. This is actually one of the things I found pretty unique from Ditf, not to say that that makes it good or bad. They eschew the pacing of romantic drama with mechs, for very kinetic pacing in the last third. Giant conflict after giant conflict with multiple reveals. My bias def comes in here, but I adore kinetic pacing, and TTGL and Diebuster both do this to a ridiculous degree. Especially Diebuster, rewatch the last 2 episodes and the pacing for reveals, conflicts, and resolutions, is light speed. This is of course due to restraints of being a 6 ep OVA, but I personally found it pretty fun to have OVA level pacing like that in a 2 cour show.

With regards to TTGL I think there are valid arguments to be said that the biggest reveal happens at ep 18, which still leaves 9 episodes for the rest. But I will say even in those last 9 episodes there were ass pull on ass pull of reveals that get quickly solved by believing in yourself, similar to Ditf, but instead with loving someone (I’ll dive more into this later). Undoubtedly TTGL has been priming you for this pacing throughout the whole show, whereas it is so diametrically opposed to the pacing before hand in Ditf that I think the whiplash was perceived as negative by many. I personally like to steer into the skid and since I like kinetic pacing to begin with, the novelty of such a switch was fun. I don’t think a show needs to maintain one type of pacing throughout for me to enjoy it. Not that having pacing all over the place makes something good either, but in this case I had no issues, I was not particularly enamored by the pacing to begin with so a massive switch didn’t hurt inherently.

Something that did bug me was the exposition dump in ep 19. Im firmly in the camp of rather having the audience do more of the heavy lifting even if at the end not everything is explained vs using an episode as mostly narration of the past. Again the whole conflict and idea was in place from the two series compositors, so I think they could have transitioned into the last act by having the pilots make discoveries within the story or something like that. I don’t mind the plot reveals themselves, just how they were executed. But more anime I can count do shit like this and so it is not nearly bad enough for me to call the show terrible, and at least it was just one episode. 

The rest of the plot following EP 19 I truly had no beef with and seemed on par for what the studio was trying to emulate. Big bad and big conflict reveal one after another, being solved by love rinse and repeat as the scope grows larger is on brand. We switched from introspective love theming, to over the top fun love themeing and I enjoy both. I won’t really be diving every particular plot issues people had in the third act but they all made sense to me for when I realized that they are completely switching gears and emulating different shows now. And the plot is just as ridiculous as the shows it tries to emulate.

Many characters became much more one note in the final act, most likely due to the pacing. Almost all of the main cast had pretty clear goals by that point and acted in a way you expect and did nothing else, even more so with most of the secondary and tertiary characters. Again I don’t think this is particularly a negative as what it is trying to emulate does the same. More nuanced characterization within the last act may have been expected as I think the first 2/3 of the anime does lead you to believe that may happen similar to Eva, but as someone who didn’t really find myself too too invested with the characterization in the first 2/3s anyways it didn’t bug me.

The last couple of complaints I haven’t really circumvented and I acknowledge that. I think having whiplash and not liking what the show is trying to do in the last third is a very fair complaint. What I am trying to point out is that, for what it tries to emulate in the last act(which is no longer multi facetted character relationship drama), it does so enjoyably. 

The switched characterizations bothered me more than characters being relegated into single notes. Most notably Zero Twos and the nines switch. I didn’t really care for the nines to begin with, but having them switch from one note antagonists to one note anti heros was all around mid for me. Honestly I woulda been fine with their exclusion from the story as a whole, but that character trope is common enough that I just shrug and move on. If only either of their characterizations was more fulfilled I would have been more receptive.

Plot wise I understand Zero Two switching characterization after self actualizing with Hiro, but as a viewer her new persona was just not as enjoyable to watch interact with the cast. I’ll get into it more when I list out some of my personal complaints, but I found the character interactions a big part of what was enjoyable about the show in general. I just found the new Zero Two to be more boring and wish she had kept some of her personality traits, but just not been a dick after ep 16, instead of what we got. We get more and more spectacle in the third act which kinda distracts from this, but I still found it a bit mid to switch her like this.

And finally i’ve seen lots of complaints about the plot ending of Hiro and Zero Twos relationship. This is something I very much oppose, and I actually found the ending for their relationship one of the highlights of the show as a whole. I do love tragedies, and I would not even mark this as one, but having the main MC’s die with each other while committing to be together throughout time and space is a very kind heartfelt notion. This is made more poignant I think if you subscribe to reincarnation as a whole, and while I do not I very much understand the draw. That two peoples love is so strong that they are tied together beyond reason and are rebirthed to meet each other anew feels very fairy tale esque. Especially with how much focus is given to the literal fairy tale within the show. Not to mention another prominent theme throughout the show is birth in general. From all the baby plot lines, to VIRM causing humans to choose immortality over birth, the rebirth of Zero Two, Hiro, Kokoro and Mitsuru when they lose their memories etc. It was very satisfying in a hopeful yet melancholic way.

Now onto my complaints, I’ll be focusing on just my two biggest ones. The main characters general characterization and the some theming of the show. The main characters for me are not particularly original or thought provoking. Most of them hit the bare minimum of resonance with me individually. Hiro in particular I think is a fairly meh MC. I rarely felt invested into him as a character, mostly just in his relationship with Zero Two. And honestly this holds true for a lot of the characters except maybe Goro and Zero Two at times. Honestly I felt more investment in all the characters interactions and relationships than the characters themselves. Which ended up being more than fine since diametrically opposed to this the character interactions are quite enjoyable to watch, tho def in part by the script, voice acting, and character animation.  And maybe in the end this helped me because it prolly led to me not getting as much expectation disappointment from the story writing and pacing switch.

For the last complaint I want to make clear that as much as I try, I’m coming to this not having to deal with Japan’s current relationship culture and the issues wherein. For context, Japan def has some issues with birth rate, romantic relationships being less common, transitioning into an adulthood that comes with much less freedom than their youth etc. And so one of this shows main themes is trying to show the importance of romantic relationships, sex, having children, etc for a society. The problem is I hold a lot of non-normative opinions on romantic relationships and child bearing in general and so while I intellectually understand what the show is trying to say and why, it does not resonate with me much at all. Furthermore, I personally think it swings the lever a bit hard in the opposite direction. It def can be interpreted as reinforcing gender roles, esp almost every single female character gets pregnant and has many many babies. It also really does itself no favors when it comes to non-hetero relationships, relegating lgbt characters into people who have to be sacrificed for the straight relationships and characters. Straight up with either suicide bombs or by devoting their life to helping the straight couples and then dying early from accelerated aging (but still being able to fix it for all the straight main characters). And while the above is not the only theme of the show for sure, it was a pretty big one which I was meh about.

## Likes

I’ll try to wrap this up pretty quickly here as I think most of the good things about the show are pretty apparent on the surface. Music and sound design were great (OP and ED bang), character designs were good, mech designs were superb. Directing, shot comp, editing and framing were all very notable and done well. I personally liked the liberal use of different letter boxing and as a whole I think it is very well directed.

The creme here for me, and honestly the biggest reason I wanted to watch to begin with, is the animation. Even if everything else was much worse, I think this show is above average purely on its animation legs. The 2d mechs and the action sequences for them is very obvious as a highlight. But in addition to that, the character animation was very high quality, lots of body movement, realistic body weight and how they interact with the environment, great facial expressions all in all just visually the show is a treat to watch. Again since this is so long already I won’t go into specifics here, but the sakugabooru page for the show says more without words than I can here lol. Maybe its a mark of quality that the show was trying to do so much more (or at least the audience expected it) that such great animation is just accepted and moved on for disliking how the show ended. 

To summarize, I think the highlights for the show for me are the animation, character interactions, ending for Hiro and Zero Two. With a special novelty shoutout to such a weird pacing switch that was enjoyable, when you don’t try to presuppose expectations and get horribly disappointed when they don’t pan out. I 100% like the shows it was trying to emulate for the last 1/3rd and so just interpreted it from that framework. I think the internet didn’t view it from that framework, and that caused a negative feedback loop on the perception of the show, but would say at minimum it is above average with novelty. Oh I also very much enjoyed how ridiculous it was with its ‘visual metaphors’ and just the generally horniness throughout. It not only thematically made sense, i’ve been coming round to enjoying, and not just dealing with, ecchi and having fan service purely for arousal more and more after reading some articles on it.
